April 14 is World Chagas Disease Day.
Since its discovery in 1909 by Brazilian researcher Carlos Ribeiro Justiniano Chagas, a Chagas disease epidemic has spread from the rural areas of Latin America to the United States.
When untreated, patients are at risk for disorders including arrythmias, dilated cardiomyopathy, or heart failure, so raising awareness among healthcare providers is a priority.
Bernardo Lombo, MD, is an assistant professor of clinical medicine at the Yale School of Medicine and an expert in Chagas disease at Yale.
Erica J. Rayack, is a joint-degree MSN/MPH student studying epidemiology of microbial diseases and family medicine at the Yale School of Public Health and the Yale School of Nursing.
Rayack created an anonymous provider survey to assess knowledge of Chagas disease.
We spoke with them about access to Chagas disease screening and medical services.
Erica J. Rayack: I first learned about Chagas disease from a Costa Rican physician who taught much of my study abroad program.
Later, I learned more about the global burden of this disease while doing independent research for a global health class at the Yale School of Public Health.
It’s been thought that most infections are caused by the insect biting a person, taking a blood meal, and then defecating parasite-infested feces near the bite area.
However, there are now regions of the world where oral ingestion of the protozoan parasites is seen as the primary source of infection.
Rather than a bite being to blame, oral ingestion would be due to something like a fresh fruit juice contaminated with the infected bug or bug feces.
This has been hypothesized as a main route of autochthonous infection in the US as well, but, as far as I understand, that is an area that requires more research.
The importance of screening a birthing parent or a patient contemplating pregnancy is highlighted both by the reduced risk of congenital transmission in patients treated prior to pregnancy, as well as the greater than 90% cure rate in infants treated within the first year of life.
This high cure rate presents health care providers with a critical opportunity to prevent spread of Chagas disease from one generation to the next.
Triatomines can already be found in much of Latin America and almost 30 states in the U.S. Habitat loss changes where insects move in relation to humans, biting rates can change, reservoir species can become more accessible, or even an insect vector’s ability to transmit pathogens can change.
We have a lot of research on this for vectors like mosquitos, which, of course, cause many more diseases than triatomine bugs.
There are researchers in the U.S. tackling these kinds of questions in regard to Chagas disease and triatomine bugs, but it's an area that can use more attention as our climate continues to be altered by human activities.
Whether the vector will pop up in new regions of the U.S. and belong to a species or subspecies capable of carrying and spreading the parasite remains to be seen, but it is certainly a concern of many Chagas researchers.
Having lived in a highly endemic region is a major risk factor.
Countries with high prevalence of Chagas disease include Bolivia, Venezuela, Brazil, and Argentina, but the vectors and the disease itself extend throughout the Americas, including the Southwest United States.
The risk of acquiring Chagas disease is often associated with living in rural parts of Latin America, though there are many exceptions to this rule.
In the United States, even in the southwest, we are far less likely to come in contact with a parasite-carrying triatomine bug than in other areas of the Americas.
That said populations are not static.
People have never been known for always staying in one place.
People emigrate and travel, and someone may move from a country like Bolivia, where screening programs for Chagas disease are relatively robust, to a country like the US, where almost no health care providers were taught to even consider screening their at-risk patients.
Other providers may not perform a test until symptomatic Chagas disease has already developed.
Thankfully, several groups in the U.S. are working to change this situation of continued neglect, such as the Strong Hearts program in East Boston, LASOCHA [Latin American Society of Chagas] out of the D.C. area, the Center of Excellence for Chagas Disease in Los Angeles, and public health professionals and clinicians at Texas A&M University.
My hope is that our various specialties, schools, and clinical programs at Yale come together and focus more heavily on this health equity issue.
One of the best resources for health care providers, students, and researchers hoping to learn more are the Chagas disease sessions put out by UT Health San Antonio Project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare Outcomes).
All past sessions are available on their website and CMEs are available for those who register and attend the sessions live.
Furthermore, we need more research and evidence to bolster or challenge current screening recommendations.
Published recommendations do not specify for now.
Due to low specificity, two different assays should be used for diagnostic testing, following Pan American Health Organization and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines.
In the U.S. there are three ELISAs and one rapid immunochromatographic assay, all of varying accessibility to providers.
Two positives are required for confirmed diagnosis and in the case of discordance, a third distinct test would need to be performed.
Commercial labs may only carry one assay type, so, often, confirmatory testing must be done through the CDC.
The authors are experts on Chagas disease in the U.S., including public health professionals, clinicians, and researchers.
They go beyond this in their paper, including other valuable recommendations in their Table 2., such as what to do after an electrocardiogram abnormality is found in an at-risk patient.
The Yale New Haven Health System, Yale School of Public Health, Yale School of Medicine, Yale School of Nursing, and physician associate program provide fertile ground for developing a robust program, both for research and patient care.
Ideally there would be community outreach, patient support programs, and interdisciplinary networks of healthcare professionals.
As with any screening program, one of the most important things is to have an appropriate plan for screened patients who test positive, and for that we need collaboration between all relevant specialties.
Bernardo Lombo: Cardiologists should order T. cruzy serologic testing for patients with the epidemiological risk factors and:
Last month, Connecticut History Day, one of more than 50 affiliate programs of National History Day, held regional contests throughout the state—including in New Haven.
On March 25, library staff members were on hand at Southern Connecticut State University to assist with the judging of work by the more than 165 students from the New Haven region who participated.
Wilbur Cross High School, Worthington Hooker School, and the University of New Haven’s Engineering-Science University Magnet School were just some of the home schools of students in the contest.
The Connecticut History Day program is designed to encourage middle- and high-school students to engage in college-level historical research, interpretation, and creative expression in response to an annual theme.
Students choose topics of interest, engage in year-long research, and share their findings through creative presentations.
The program invites museum and library staff, teachers, and scholars to support students’ exploration of their chosen topics by serving as judges—to ask questions, offer feedback, and provide encouragement and direction for young historians.
This year, six librarians and staff members volunteered to serve as judges for the Connecticut History Day contests.
Their engagement with primary sources was encouraging, as was their willingness to voice the frustrations and difficulties they encountered while researching and creating an exhibit.
Kirkpatrick was team leader this year for one of the three teams evaluating junior individual exhibits, but it was his fourth year evaluating student projects for Connecticut History.
Thomas Thurston, director of Education and Public Outreach at the Gilder Lehrman Center, also represented Yale as a judge in the New Haven contest.
It gave me a real sense of how much work goes into simply organizing a statewide event like this.
But seeing the excitement of middle- and high-school students at the event with their teachers and families always made it a worthwhile endeavor.” 
The judges work in teams to review their assigned individual-student or student-group submissions.
They also speak with each student to ask questions about their interest in the subject, the research process, their argument, and their findings.
The judges collaborate as they evaluate the students’ written proposals and the final projects, working with a detailed rubric.
They also each provide constructive written comments.
Students receive copies of the judges’ feedback in order to benefit from suggestions.
Those students who qualify to enter the statewide contest have the chance to refine their projects based on the judges’ direction before they resubmit.
This year, thousands of students statewide created exhibitions, papers, documentaries, websites, and performances around the theme “Frontiers in History: People, Places, Ideas.” The concept was broad enough to encompass local and global history and a variety of people, places, and ideas.
In New Haven, student topics ranged from the Manhattan Project, heliocentric theory, the smallpox vaccine, and Japan’s Shinkansen bullet train to Maya Lin, the Freedom Riders, Richard Nixon, and the Beatles.
At New Haven’s closing ceremony, Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro and Joe Bertolino, president of Southern Connecticut State University, awarded first-, second-, and third-place prizes to 44 students in the junior and senior divisions.
Top-place winners in each of the state’s six regional competitions will compete in the statewide competition on May 6 at Central Connecticut State University.
Students on the teams of Roberta Dougherty, Trip Kirkpatrick, and Sarah Lerner are among those headed to the state contest.
Students who win first place in the state event will go on to compete in the National History Day contest, which will be held at the University of Maryland in College Park on June 12 and 13.
We have some very impressive young scholars in our state.”
Connecticut History Day invites librarians, historians, educators, and other volunteers to serve as project judges at the upcoming state event on May 6 in New Britain.
Sign-up to be a state contest judge by April 21.
Jason Fish, a transformative and experienced leader in health care delivery and operations, has been named the next CEO of Yale Health, President Peter Salovey announced today.
Fish, who is currently the chief medical officer of Southwestern Health Resources (SWHR) — a collaboration between Texas Health Resources and the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center formed to support their strategic and operational transition to population health management in North Texas — has exhibited a commitment to advancing patient-centered clinical care and building strong teams that deliver exceptional care and service, Salovey said.
As a patient-centered, clinically integrated network of 31 hospitals and more than 7,000 clinicians, SWHR cares for more than 800,000 patients across 16 counties in North Texas.
Fish also serves as the chief medical officer for SWHR’s regional Medicare Advantage health plan.
Yale Health is the staff model health maintenance organization (HMO) that provides comprehensive care and coverage to Yale University students, faculty, staff, and their families.
Fish begins his new role on July 1.
Fish has introduced initiatives — spanning the continuum from wellness to advanced disease — that have improved patient outcomes, increased quality and efficiency of care delivery, and enhanced support systems for staff,” Salovey wrote in a message to the Yale community.
Notable among these initiatives have been efforts to partner with mental health providers to improve screening and treatment, Salovey added.
Fish succeeds Dr. Paul Genecin, who retired on Jan. 6 after 33 years of service to the Yale community, including as CEO of Yale Health since 1997.
Nanci Fortgang, Yale Health’s chief clinical operations officer, is serving as interim CEO.
In his work, Fish has forged strong relationships aimed at meeting the needs of SWHR’s patients, including close ties to surrounding hospitals and associated facilities, and to community organizations.
Noting the inefficiencies in transitioning patients out of hospital stays, he used a data-driven approach and leveraged his partnerships with hospitals and post-acute care facilities to improve these transitions in care.
These efforts ensure patients needing additional care following hospitalization receive it from a high-quality network of post-acute facilities, such as skilled nursing facilities, home health agencies, and rehabilitation facilities.
With a background in health services and population health, Fish has exercised effective population health management through innovation and robust data analytics, Salovey wrote.
Several of his care delivery improvements have been published in the medical literature, and he has spoken internationally on his deployed population health strategies.
He currently uses artificial intelligence models to predict key health care events, such as acute, unplanned hospitalizations, recurrent emergency room utilization, and progression of diabetes or kidney disease.
These models identify rising risks for patients early in the course of illnesses, enabling clinical teams to intervene before patients’ conditions worsen.
Fish understands first-hand the importance of monitoring and improving, when indicated, workplace processes and culture,” Salovey wrote.
Fish earned his B.A.
He did a general internal medicine residency at the University of California-Los Angeles (UCLA), where he also completed the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program and earned a Master of Science in health services research from UCLA’s School of Public Health.
While at University of Texas Southwestern, Fish earned a Master of Science in healthcare management and administrative sciences and was appointed to the rank of professor of medicine, recognizing his publications and teaching activities.
Fish and his wife, Dr. Veronica Meneses, come to Yale as “first-year empty nesters,” Salovey wrote, with both of their children in college.
Fish and Meneses love to hike and are looking forward to exploring all the local trails with their two dogs,” Salovey wrote.
Fish enjoys music, literature, and the cinema, with a particular love for science fiction, and is eager to experience the richness of all the opportunities offered at Yale and New Haven.”
In his message, Salovey expressed gratitude to colleagues at Yale Health “for their unflagging dedication to the health and well-being of the university community” and to Fortgang for her leadership during the transition.
He also thanked members of the search advisory committee, chaired by Dr. Stephanie Spangler, Yale’s vice provost for health affairs, and John Whelan, vice president for human resources; the student consultative council; and members of the university community who shared their insights during the search process.
Said Spangler: “Participating in the search for the next chief executive officer of Yale Health was an extraordinarily rewarding experience.
It was a great privilege to work with my co-chair, Vice President for Human Resources John Whelan, and our wise and dedicated partners on the search advisory committee, and so gratifying to see the strength of our community’s engagement in Yale Health’s future, as faculty, students, staff, and their families shared their health care experiences and aspirations with us.
Fish will join our community — with his impressive record of accomplishment and his clear commitment to the health and well-being of individuals and populations, he is extremely well positioned to lead Yale Health into the future.”
Karen N. Peart: karen.peart@yale.edu, 203-980-2222
As a graduate student in 2006, Sarah Lowe, PhD joined a group of researchers following low-income, unmarried mothers who were living in New Orleans when Hurricane Katrina struck the area the previous year.
Lowe is also associate professor of psychiatry at Yale School of Medicine and associate clinical professor of nursing.
Lowe and the other researchers surveyed the women over the next 15 years, noting both the continued negative impact of the hurricane on the women’s lives and their overall resilience to the setback, with many earning college degrees, finding stable housing, and successfully raising their children despite the trauma of Katrina.
Then came another trauma: COVID-19.
The researchers noted their unique opportunity to study how the pandemic would impact a vulnerable group—the Katrina survivors—who had previously experienced another collective trauma.
They surveyed approximately 400 women in 2021, publishing the first paper from their results in February 2023.
The paper’s lead authors are Meghan Zacher, assistant professor of population studies at Brown University, and Ethan J. Raker, assistant professor of sociology at the University of British Columbia.
Lowe is the senior author of the paper.
When the pandemic hit, it became very clear that it was not going to affect all subpopulations equally.
The results, which compared the mental health impact of Hurricane Katrina to the COVID-19 pandemic, surprised Lowe: Nearly 42 percent of the Katrina survivors experienced post-traumatic stress symptoms one year into the pandemic—almost the exact percentage that had experienced those symptoms a year after the hurricane.
Almost half of the respondents (48 percent) were experiencing psychological distress a year into the pandemic, compared with just over one-third (37 percent) a year post-Katrina.
For these women, the COVID-19 pandemic was associated with the same, or worse, mental health impacts as Hurricane Katrina—one of the worst national disasters in U.S. history.
Hurricane Katrina took place over a shorter time period and was geographically constrained, Lowe says, meaning the rest of the country could channel resources to the Gulf Coast.
But everyone experienced the COVID-19 pandemic—the widespread illness and death lasted longer and the economic impacts were graver.
Though the survey focused on a specific subpopulation, Lowe says it offers insights for the general population.
The researchers’ prior work showed that, for some people, the mental health experiences of collective trauma will cause long-term impacts.
Trauma survivors might be at greater risk for adversity during collective traumas, Lowe said.
Continued support for vulnerable survivors of collective trauma is key, Lowe said.
Collective trauma can emerge from any tragic event including extreme weather events, outbreaks of disease, mass shootings, fatal fires, and multiple-victim auto accidents.
Lowe said the study’s findings provide new insights into collective trauma and may support proposals to amend the current definition of trauma in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the authoritative handbook of mental health disorders.
The manual’s current definition of trauma, Lowe said, doesn’t account for the myriad struggles people experiencing collective trauma can face, such as financial strain, housing instability, and discrimination.
Some health care professionals believe it should.
Lowe and her co-researchers are continuing to sift through their survey results, and expect to publish follow-up papers on their findings.
This podcast series explores issues related to sustainable development and economic justice in low- and middle-income countries.
In the lead up to the 2023 Spring Meetings of the World Bank Group and the IMF, “Reshaping Development for a New Era”, Episode 5 features Kevin Donovan of Yale University discussing his research on growth transitions, labor market dynamics, and constraints to firm growth.
This week's 2023 Spring Meetings of the World Bank Group and the IMF with a focus on “reshaping development for a new era” are an important reminder that systemic change does not happen overnight.
Strong economic development requires adequate infrastructure, and individual access to markets and opportunities.
However, many communities face social, environmental, and economic barriers that hobble development.
Harsh landscapes and remote settings can constrain access to markets, and crises such as the Covid-19 pandemic, food insecurity, and climate change can set back hard-earned gains in development.
In this episode of Voices in Development, Kevin Donovan, Assistant Professor of Economics and Global Affairs and EGC affiliate, discusses his diverse body of recent work unpacking the conditions and tools needed for countries to make these market-driven transitions in an era of overlapping crises.
Donovan has used macro and microeconomic models to explore knowledge transfers among Kenyan microenterprise owners, the implications of shifting labor market dynamics for policy, and the ability of last mile infrastructure such as pedestrian bridges to connect rural villages to cities in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).
In collaboration with Bridges to Prosperity, Donovan’s insights into a bridge built in Nicaragua concluded that it not only gave villages crucial access to markets for better paid jobs, but also had spillover benefits from connecting people to schools and to hospitals.
Our results in Nicaragua suggest there are big benefits to this type of last mile infrastructure.
There are lots of margins that get affected by the same intervention, the same bridge that gets built.
It's true that you get access to markets – which is great for selling your crops and getting access to higher paying jobs – but you're also connecting people to schools and hospitals.
It turns out to be a pretty cost effective way to help people in rural areas.
Recognizing that improving access to markets is just one component of the journey countries need to take to harness sustainable growth, Donovan’s work has used large datasets to explore the dynamics of labor markets in LMICs.
While in some settings regular turnover in a labor market may be indicative of a healthy economy, the podcast explores how similar dynamics in poorer countries can reveal the insecurities present at the early stages of the job ladder.
Kevin Donovan received his PhD in Economics from Arizona State University in 2013 and has since conducted extensive research on labor market access and firm growth in LMICs.
He previously worked as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Economics at the University of Notre Dame, and his work has been published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Journal of Development Economics, Review of Economic Studies, and Econometrica.
He is a Faculty Affiliate of EGC, the Yale School of Management, and the Yale Jackson School of Global Affairs.
